Freedom Beckons
How the average American can achieve financial independence

Version 0.1

Introduction

Ignorance is bliss.  People who believed they liked their jobs suffered a lot less than I did when I was working.  In far less humane working conditions, I suffered less than after I admitted to myself that I hate working.  Even more important to me than spreading freedom is spreading happiness.  If you believe you have a decent job, and you don't want to suffer with the knowledge that things could be so much better, please stop reading now.

In this essay, I will explain the tools and resources I used to achieve financial independence by age 32.  I will give tips for how you can achieve financial independence yourself within ten years.  However, everyone's situation is different, so there's no such thing as a one-size-fits-all formula.  The estimates I use will not be true for any one reader, but I hope they will be close enough that you can adapt them to your needs and disregard anything that isn't relevant for you.  Nevertheless, the fundamental ideas of this essay should be true for most Americans.  

This is just an essay, and there are hundreds of books that help with achieve financial independence.  I can't hope to match the scope of these books, and it's not my intention to duplicate effort.  What I found lacking was something short, that summarizes the ideas of these books.  I also found that these books each have their own strengths and weaknesses.  There was no one bible I could just hand to people, not even a good starting point.  That's the goal of this essay, a starting point, a map in a sense of the vast territory of literature on financial independence and investing.  So, at the end of each section, I will give a list of resources I recommend, which will complete the overviews presented here.

Before you write off an idea in this essay as being irrelevant for you, I urge you to at least investigate some of these resources.  There is an urge for some, when they see something that looks hard, to try to rationalize why they "can't" do it, but in fact they're just afraid of taking on a challenge, or are afraid of change.  Be careful about this tendency in yourself.  Really search your soul and ask yourself if you've actually chosen to ignore a step out of fear.

It's not easy to achieve financial independence.  If it was, more people would do it.  There is no easy formula.  It requires a lot of reading, research, creativity, awareness, and confidence.  It will take time and effort.  You will be challenged to do things that go against a lifetime of experience.

However, I assure you that it's easier than most people think.  There are certain assumptions and beliefs people have about money, work, spending, and lifestyle that they never thought to question.  I will challenge these beliefs, and as they start to dissolve, you'll see that you're probably closer to financial independence than you thought.

I use the term "financial independence," not "early retirement."  My own goal was to completely stop accepting money in exchange for my labor.  I find that most people don't share this goal to the same logical extreme that I do.  What most people want is more freedom, in whatever way that is meaningful for them.  This doesn't disqualify what I have to teach, but in fact only makes it easier.

I believe it's best to read the whole essay all the way through first.  Feel free to take breaks to think about the ideas I provide if that's what you need, but I recommend that you not get bogged down too much at any one place.  Get the whole overview, a sense for how the whole thing works.  After reading it, you're convinced that it will work for you, and you have a sense for which parts are relevant for you and which aren't, then go back and look into some of the resources I provide, and start doing the work you've decided to do.  I try to provide these resources in the order that I think is best for most people, but feel free to skip around if that works better for you.

Why financial independence?

For me, this was a no-brainer.  Over time, I found a lot of people who actually like their jobs.  All of them have fairly stable jobs that pay well, give them some freedom, challenge their minds, and surround them with somewhat like-minded people.  Those who don't have such a job still believe that it exists out there, somewhere, the elusive perfect job.  Maybe it's out there somewhere.

However, I believe most Americans don't have the luxury of a job they love, even many of those who think they do.  Humans have a remarkable ability for adaptation.  When they're in a situation where they have no choice, they'll make the best of it.  My life isn't perfect, they'll reason, but it could be a lot worse.  The supply and demand equation for employment is so skewed that people actually feel lucky to have a job.  Some people were raised with a strong work ethic, or a belief that a person's contribution to society is in their work.  All of this comforts them, and helps them persevere through all the compromises they make every single day.

Freedom is an idea many Americans have died for, with even more who are ready and willing to.  That's how important freedom is to Americans.  But what is freedom?  What does freedom mean for you?  Have you ever really defined it?  It means different things to different people, and many haven't thought much about what it means to them, so I find very odd that they're willing to die for it.

This was the question I started out with, and I suggest you start out with it too.  Before you do any hard work, challenging your beliefs and changing your lifestyle, it's important to be clear about why you're doing it in the first place, and what you hope to achieve by doing it.  That's the only thing that will keep you going when the going gets rough.  You'll start asking yourself, is this even worth it?  If the answer is no, isn't it better to know that now, and not waste your time?

For me, freedom means having choices about how I live my life.  My life is basically the time I have on this planet.  It's a very finite resource.  Given a life expectancy of 80 years, I have roughly 42 million minutes total.  Every one of them is precious, and they're ticking by at a steady rate.  When I started this goal, I'd already spent 12.6 million of them.  Actually, it felt like other people had spent them for me.  My parents, teachers, and society made choices on my behalf that consumed these precious minutes, my life energy.

The two biggest are schooling and livelihood.  A quarter of my life was devoted to education, and for this, institutions were entrusted that I believe have mostly squandered my life energy.  By that time, I had little trust that any other institution could be trusted to treat my life energy with the same respect that I could.  It was up to me to take control of my life energy from these institutions.

This calculation of 12.6 million minutes is a little simplistic.  After all, not every one of our minutes is devoted to schools and jobs, right?  In fact, they are, in a roundabout way.  So many of our choices are confined by these central choices.  Where you live, how you dress, when you wake up, who you interact with, how you spend your money, how you get around, and what you learn are all dictated in large extent by your school or job.

A good litmus test for true job satisfaction is what you would change if money wasn't an issue.  Would you keep the same job?  Would you work the same number of hours?  If so, then you're pretty much already financially independent.  But insofar as it would change, you're trading your life for money, something precious and limited for something abundant, fleeting, and insubstantial.  You have only one life, and then it's gone, forever.  There is no other time to enjoy the fruits of your labor.  This is it.  Given something as precious as life, I consider it nothing less than an insult to trade one precious minute of it for something as shallow as money.

Employment is merely a business transaction.  You're selling your life energy to the highest bidder.  All the laws of economics apply, particularly supply and demand.  If the things you love the most in life, in the ways that you love doing them, are in high demand in a huge marketplace filled with cut throat competition, then you're very lucky.  Most of the passions people have aren't in very high demand in the employment marketplace.  Even if they are, jobs usually require employees to follow only one of these passions for 40 hours a week, on a specific schedule that they set.  So, for a truly satisfying job, you must have one overriding passion, that is in demand, that you can turn on and off on a schedule set by other people.

My passions don't fit that very rigid mold, and that is why my freedom is so important to me.  I have many passions, most of which aren't in very high demand, and come and go rapidly.  Sometimes I want to do just one thing for weeks at a time, then put it away for months.  Sometimes I just wants to bounce around from one passion to the next throughout the day.  That's what freedom means for me.  What does it mean for you?

For some people, freedom means never working again.  For some people, freedom means more time for friends, family, and hobbies.  They still want to work, just not as many hours as they presently do.  For some people, freedom means more negotiating power with their employers, and not depending on them so much for their livelihood allows them to make demands they might not otherwise make.  For some people, freedom means changing careers to something less stressful and more satisfying.  For some people, freedom means devoting one's life to service, volunteering for causes they believe in.

There's a whole spectrum of financial independence, from completely dependent on an employer, living paycheck to paycheck, making loan payments, to having 100% of your expenses paid for from your investments.  The less debt you have and the more money you have stashed away, the more financially independent you are.  It's up to you where on this spectrum you'd like to be.  The further you want to get to the total retirement extreme, the harder you will have to work at this goal, the longer it will take, and the more trade offs you'll have to make.  So, choose where on the spectrum you'd like to be.

Once you know what financial independence means for you, visualize it, dream about it.  Fantasize about what your life will be like once you've achieved this goal.  Imagine how enriched you'll feel, following your passions or spending more time with friends, family, or community.  Get this dream into your bones first, because if this is just a passing whim, you'll likely give up on it when you feel challenged.  And that's okay too.  It helps to know our options, and why we've not chosen that option.  Sometimes a seed is planted, and you'll re-visit it later when the time is right for you.

I can't know where on the spectrum you've chosen, and I don't have experience with any goal but my own.  However, since I chose the most extreme goal, that of total financial independence, all of it could be useful for you.  What I will present is how the average American can achieve total financial independence in ten years.  The less financial independence you want, and the greater your time horizon, the more luxury you have of ignoring some of my advice.  It's possible to achieve total financial independence in less than ten years, but what I will provide will be insufficient for reaching that goal.
